---
layout: construction
title:  Explorer, Exploiter, and Maintainer
category: Thoughts
tags: [optimization]
description: Categorising helps how you should act towards them
---
What do you want them to learn?
- There are three categories of people and you should not mix em up

What is their interest in what you’ve got to say?
- There is a big chance that you fall into one of the categories, or your partners or your friend 

How sophisticated are they?
- Not too comlplex, everyone with basic knowledge should understand it

How much detail do they want?
- A few detail so they or their friends could categorize themselves into one or a mixbetween

Whom do you want to own the information?

How can you motivate them to listen to you?
 - It helps you categorize people so - at least theoritically - it would make you treat others better

# Three Types

We like categorizing people. We judge people by their horoscope for fun and sometimes for real 
when it conforms with our belief. Categorizing helps us navigate this chaotic world and make
a quick decision. We categorize from the most abstract thing to the most mundane thing. From religion
to laundry. Now, we want to categorize people into three categories. Recognise these categories should
helps you treat them and place them to a certain task if you are a decision maker.

As the title stated, we try to categorize whether they are an explorer, an exploiter, or a maintainer.
The most common analogy i found for these is a commandos, a soldier, and a police. Does one is better
than the other? No. They have their own specific job and trained to do their job well. Let us delve
deeper to these categories by examining them one by one

## A Commandos or An Explorer

A commandos is a special force among military. They have the most complex and hardest task. The number
of people could fit for these job is really small. After all, they need to really fit and stand against
the hard and unexpecterd adversary. Commados missions are rarely the same. They task varies from
hostage rescue to espionage. They only deployed in the most critical condition but these critical
condition is rarely occured.  

1. Every workforce can be divided into three categories
2. Industries orientation depend on ratio of these categories
3. What are each role and why you should not mix it up
4. what are the connection to each other and how they are collaborate
5. Example
6. Disclaimer
